feat: add Using Rust crates in Elixir blog post (#1975)
mainmatter/mainmatter.com: src/posts/2023-01-17-using-rust-crates-in-elixir.md

---
title: "Rustler - Using Rust crates in Elixir"
authorHandle: BobrImperator
tags: elixir
bio: "Software Developer"
description:
  "Bartłomiej Dudzik shows how you can use a Rust crate in Elixir using NIFs
  with Rustler."
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2022-12-09-sending-emails-from-the-edge-with-rust/og-image.jpg
tagline: |
  <p>Help with tagline please</p>
image: "/assets/images/posts/2022-12-09-sending-emails-from-the-edge-with-rust/rust-mail-server.png"
imageAlt: ""
---

Rust and Elixir are a match made in heaven! Discord in their blog posts already

> shown that combining the two can give you insane performance boosts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
showed that when used together, Rust and Elixir can help you increase performance significantly.
```

[https://discord.com/blog/using-rust-to-scale-elixir-for-11-million-concurrent-users](https://discord.com/blog/using-rust-to-scale-elixir-for-11-million-concurrent-users)
[https://discord.com/blog/why-discord-is-switching-from-go-to-rust](https://discord.com/blog/why-discord-is-switching-from-go-to-rust)

> In this blog post I want to show how easily you can build and use small programs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this blog post, I will show you how easily you can build and use small programs
```

inside Elixir using Rustler.

> Recently for a small private project I needed a functionality to create and edit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I recently needed a function to create and edit
```

> PDF files. I searched for some packages and most notable one for Elixir is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PDF files for a small private project. I searched for some packages and the most notable one for Elixir is
```

[https://github.com/andrewtimberlake/elixir-pdf](https://github.com/andrewtimberlake/elixir-pdf),

> however it only offers creating pdfs without additional manipulation. That was

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but it only offers to create pdfs without additional manipulation. That was
```

fine by me since I wanted an excuse to do some more things in Rust anyway, and I
found [https://github.com/J-F-Liu/lopdf](https://github.com/J-F-Liu/lopdf).

> In the beginning I’ve written my program as a regular project in rust i.e.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the beginning, I had written my program as a regular project in rust i.e.
```

> `cargo new my_pdf` and then it was happy coding 🙂 I wanted the program to take

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`cargo new my_pdf` and then it was happy coding 🙂. I wanted the program to take
```

some configuration and create/edit a PDF file based on it.

After I played around with it, I started wondering “How much work would it be to
make it an Elixir NIF?”.

> Turns out - there’s not a whole lot additional stuff we need to do in order to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Turns out - there’s not a whole lot of additional stuff we need to do in order to
```

comfortably use crates inside Elixir projects.

There are about 2 things we need to keep in mind and take care of:

> - Error handling There needs to be something that maps Rust errors into Elixir

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Error handling: there needs to be something that maps Rust errors into Elixir
```

>   atoms that so we could easily handle them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  atoms so that we could easily handle them.
```

> - Spice it up with Rustler traits Typically your functions and structs will need

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Rustler traits: typically your functions and structs will need
```

>   to derive from appropriate traits so they can be usable inside Elixir. Only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to derive from appropriate traits so they can be usable inside Elixir (only
```

>   the public parts of it of course.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the public parts of it of course).
```

## Setup

> Setting up a project with Rustlers is too easy, you can find a link to Rustler’s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting up a project with Rustlers is fairly easy. You can find a link to Rustler’s
```

Author: Just fixed a typo so it doesn't say "Rustlers" but "Rustler's".
Accepting the suggestion otherwise.
```suggestion
Setting up a project with Rustler's fairly easy. You can find a link to Rustler’s
```

environment.

1. Create a new Elixir project
   1. `mix new rustler_pdf`
2. Add `:rustler` dependency

   1. Edit your `mix.exs` file and add rustler

   ```elixir
    # mix.exs
     defp deps do
       [
         {:rustler, "~> 0.26.0"}
       ]
     end
   ```

3. Download packages
   1. Run `mix deps.get`
4. Setup Rustler
   1. Run `mix rustler.new`
   2. On “Module name” prompt type in `RustlerPdf` (Name of your Elixir module
      that Rustler registers NIFs to)
   3. On “Library name” prompt type in `rustlerpdf` (Name of your cargo crate)
5. Configure Rustler

   1. Add Rustler behaviour in `rustler_pdf.ex`

   ```elixir
   defmodule RustlerPdf do
     use Rustler,
         otp_app: :rustler_pdf, # must match the name of project in `mix.exs`
         crate: :rustlerpdf # must match the name of the crate in `native/rustlerpdf/Cargo.toml`

     def add(_arg1, _arg2), do: :erlang.nif_error(:nif_not_loaded)
   end
   ```

   b. Make sure Rust’s boilerplate is this:

   ```rust
   // native/src/lib.rs

   #[rustler::nif]
   fn add(a: i64, b: i64) -> i64 {
       a + b
   }

   rustler::init!("Elixir.RustlerPdf", [add]);
   ```

> 6. Test that setup works

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Test that the setup works
```

pub struct PdfWriterOperation {
    page_number: i32,
    font: (String, i32),
    dimensions: (f64, f64),
    field_type: FieldType,
    value: Option<String>,
}

// Struct which is the program's input
pub struct PdfWriterConfiguration {
    input_file_path: Option<String>,
    output_file_path: String,
    operations: Vec<PdfWriterOperation>,
}

pub fn read_config() -> PdfWriterConfiguration {
  PdfWriterConfiguration {
        input_file_path: None,
        output_file_path: "PIT-8C-modified.pdf".to_string(),
        operations: vec![
            PdfWriterOperation {
                page_number: 0,
                font: ("F1".to_string(), 10),
                dimensions: (462.82, 55.92),
                value: Some("120.99".to_string()),
                field_type: FieldType::Money,
            },
            PdfWriterOperation {
                page_number: 0,
                font: ("F1".to_string(), 10),
                dimensions: (43.32, 347.81),
                value: Some("41.0".to_string()),
                field_type: FieldType::Money,
            },
        ],
    }
}

pub fn create_pdf(config: PdfWriterConfiguration) -> Result<(), std::io::Error> {}
```

> This would be the overview of pretty much entirety of Rust implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the overview of pretty much the entirety of the Rust implementation
```

> “minus” the `lopdf` interaction. In general the idea is that given

Reviewer: ```suggestion
“minus” the `lopdf` interaction. In general, the idea is that given
```

The only relevant part of implementation here at the moment in my opinion is the
struct itself, as you can see it has `numbers`, `strings`, `tuples`, `structs`
and `enums`. Later we’ll see how they map to Elixir data structures.

## Rustler-ize-it

Now we need to add traits to our data and functions so the tooling knows how to
marshall the data between Rust and Elixir environments.

```rust
// import Rustler traits
use rustler::{NifStruct, NifUnitEnum};

#[derive(NifUnitEnum)]
pub enum FieldType {
    Money,
    Text,
    Slotted,
}

#[derive(NifStruct)]
#[module = "RustlerPdf.PdfWriterOperation"]
pub struct PdfWriterOperation {
    page_number: i32,
    font: (String, i32),
    dimensions: (f64, f64),
    field_type: FieldType,
    value: Option<String>,
}

#[derive(NifStruct)]
#[module = "RustlerPdf.PdfWriterConfiguration"]
pub struct PdfWriterConfiguration {
    input_file_path: Option<String>,
    output_file_path: String,
    operations: Vec<PdfWriterOperation>,
}
```

The `NifStruct` `NifUnitEnum` and `module = "Elixir.ModuleName` attribute
provide implementations and metadata for the languages to communicate.

### Enum variant with value - NifTaggedEnum

> Additional note here I’m using `NifUnitEnum` which is a simple Enum variant. If

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An additional note here: I’m using `NifUnitEnum` which is a simple Enum variant. If
```

end
```

Now we can use the NIFs like regular Elixir functions. Let’s try it out in the
interactive console `iex -S mix`

```elixir
[nix-shell:~/Projects/elixir-pdf-experiment/rustler_pdf]$ iex -S mix

iex(1)> RustlerPdf.read_config()
%{
  __struct__: RustlerPdf.PdfWriterConfiguration,
  input_file_path: nil,
  operations: [
    %{
      __struct__: RustlerPdf.PdfWriterOperation,
      dimensions: {462.82, 55.92},
      field_type: :money,
      font: {"F1", 10},
      page_number: 0,
      value: "120.99"
    },
    %{
      __struct__: RustlerPdf.PdfWriterOperation,
      dimensions: {43.32, 347.81},
      field_type: :money,
      font: {"F1", 10},
      page_number: 0,
      value: "41.0"
    }
  ],
  output_file_path: "PIT-8C-modified.pdf"
}
iex(2)>
```

Notice how the Rust struct now maps to a plain Elixir `map` type with additional
\_\_struct\_\_ metadata, this is how Rustler ensures type safety. If the
\_\_struct\_\_ would be missing, then we’d get an `ArgumentError` exception.

Out of curiosity I was also benchmarking this implementation against an Elixir
library called `elixir-pdf` and it seems like it was roughly 2x slower, but

> interestingly used 1/3 of memory less. I’m not too familiar with profiling, so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interestingly used 1/3 less memory. I’m not too familiar with profiling, so
```

---
title: "Rustler - Using Rust crates in Elixir"
authorHandle: BobrImperator
tags: elixir
bio: "Software Developer"
description:
  "Bartłomiej Dudzik shows how you can use a Rust crate in Elixir using NIFs
  with Rustler."
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2022-12-09-sending-emails-from-the-edge-with-rust/og-image.jpg
tagline: |

>   <p>Help with tagline please</p>

Reviewer 2: I'd say something like

> Elixir is already pretty fast but sometimes you need just that extra bit of performance for specific tasks. Rust is an obvious choice in theses cases. In this blog post, I show how to use it…

image: "/assets/images/posts/2022-12-09-sending-emails-from-the-edge-with-rust/rust-mail-server.png"
imageAlt: ""
---

> Rust and Elixir work great combined! In their blog posts, Discord already showed
> that when used together, Rust and Elixir can help you increase performance
> significantly.
> [https://discord.com/blog/using-rust-to-scale-elixir-for-11-million-concurrent-users](https://discord.com/blog/using-rust-to-scale-elixir-for-11-million-concurrent-users)
> [https://discord.com/blog/why-discord-is-switching-from-go-to-rust](https://discord.com/blog/why-discord-is-switching-from-go-to-rust)

Reviewer 2: I'd not just add the URLs like that but make this a bit more accessible for readers:

```suggestion
Rust and Elixir work great combined! In their blog posts, One of many companies that have successfully used Rust to significantly increase the performance of their Elixir apps is Discord – they [shared some details on their blog](https://discord.com/blog/using-rust-to-scale-elixir-for-11-million-concurrent-users) (and also wrote about [why they switched from Go to Rust](https://discord.com/blog/why-discord-is-switching-from-go-to-rust)).
```

In this blog post, I will show you how easily you can build and use small

> programs inside Elixir using Rustler.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add link to the old post here and say that this is an updated and extended version of it?

Author: I don't see much value in that.

> I recently needed a function to create and edit PDF files for a small private

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I recently needed a function to create and edit PDF files with Elixir for a small private
```

?

project. I searched for some packages and the most notable one for Elixir is
[https://github.com/andrewtimberlake/elixir-pdf](https://github.com/andrewtimberlake/elixir-pdf),

> but it only offers to create pdfs without additional manipulation. That was fine

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
but it only offers to create PDFs without additional manipulation. That was fine
```

> by me since I wanted an excuse to do some more things in Rust anyway, and I

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
by me since I was looking for an excuse to do some more things in Rust anyway, and I
```

found [https://github.com/J-F-Liu/lopdf](https://github.com/J-F-Liu/lopdf).

> In the beginning, I had written my program as a regular project in rust i.e.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the beginning, I had written my program as a regular project in Rust, i.e.
```

`cargo new my_pdf` and then it was happy coding 🙂. I wanted the program to take
some configuration and create/edit a PDF file based on it.

After I played around with it, I started wondering “How much work would it be to
make it an Elixir NIF?”.

Turns out - there’s not a whole lot of additional stuff we need to do in order

> to comfortably use crates inside Elixir projects.

Reviewer 2: I'd give a quick intro to what Rustler is here, otherwise you're making the switch from wanting to use a Rust crate in Elixir to having to implement particular Rustler traits. For most people that'll be fine probably but not everyone reading this might know what Rustler is?

Just one sentence like "Rustler is a simple toolkit that builds a bridge between Rust and Elixir…" (with a link to Rustler) or so will solve this.

There are about 2 things we need to keep in mind and take care of:

- Error handling: there needs to be something that maps Rust errors into Elixir
  atoms so that we could easily handle them.

> - Rustler traits: typically your functions and structs will need to derive from
>   appropriate traits so they can be usable inside Elixir (only the public parts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Rustler traits: typically your functions and structs will need to implement
  appropriate traits so they can be usable inside Elixir (only the public parts
```

If I'm not misunderstanding something substantial you can't derive from traits (or anything else) in Rust?

Author: Trait creators can provide implementations through `derive`.
E.g. Rustler implements `nif_struct` method on a struct that derives from `NifStruct` trait.
https://github.com/rusterlium/rustler/blob/master/rustler_codegen/src/lib.rs#L125

Reviewer 2: Ah, I see – I think the problem here is the word _"from"_. I'd say "deriving from" refers to a concept like inheritance while the mechanism you describe is "deriving the implementation" – subtle but relevant difference.

Author: I get what you're saying and you're probably right, but that goes beyond a nitpick in my opinion.
It'd be a _more correct_ wording but doesn't mean that "deriving from" is _incorrect_. That's a big IMO though.

  of it of course).

## Setup

> Setting up a project with Rustler's fairly easy. You can find a link to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Setting up a project with Rustler is fairly easy. You can find a link to
```

> Rustler’s instructions here:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the instructions here:
```

otherwise Rustler repeats

[https://github.com/rusterlium/rustler#getting-started](https://github.com/rusterlium/rustler#getting-started)

> I’ll assume you have both Elixir and Rust installed on your development

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I’ll assume you have both Elixir and Rust installed in your development
```

environment.

> 1. Create a new Elixir project
>    1. `mix new rustler_pdf`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create a new Elixir project: `mix new rustler_pdf`
```

Not sure the sub-list adds much value :)

> 2. Add `:rustler` dependency
> 
>    1. Edit your `mix.exs` file and add rustler

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Add the `:rustler` dependency in `mix.exs`:
```

see above

   ```elixir
    # mix.exs
     defp deps do
       [
         {:rustler, "~> 0.26.0"}
       ]
     end
   ```

> 3. Download packages
>    1. Run `mix deps.get`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Download packages: `mix deps.get`
```

4. Setup Rustler
   1. Run `mix rustler.new`
   2. On “Module name” prompt type in `RustlerPdf` (Name of your Elixir module
      that Rustler registers NIFs to)
   3. On “Library name” prompt type in `rustlerpdf` (Name of your cargo crate)
5. Configure Rustler

   1. Add Rustler behaviour in `rustler_pdf.ex`

   ```elixir
   defmodule RustlerPdf do
     use Rustler,

>          otp_app: :rustler_pdf, # must match the name of project in `mix.exs`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
         otp_app: :rustler_pdf, # must match the name of the project in `mix.exs`
```

         crate: :rustlerpdf # must match the name of the crate in `native/rustlerpdf/Cargo.toml`

     def add(_arg1, _arg2), do: :erlang.nif_error(:nif_not_loaded)
   end
   ```

>    b. Make sure Rust’s boilerplate is this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   2. Make sure Rust’s boilerplate is this:
```

   ```rust
   // native/src/lib.rs

   #[rustler::nif]
   fn add(a: i64, b: i64) -> i64 {
       a + b
   }

   rustler::init!("Elixir.RustlerPdf", [add]);
   ```

6. Test that the setup works
   1. Run `iex -S mix`
   2. Execute `RustlerPdf.add(1,2)`
   3. See if it successfully outputs `3`

## Implementing the PDF program

I’ll mostly showcase contracts and interfaces of the Rust part of the program.

> The `lopdf`'s crate is irrelevant here and I’ll try to focus on the list from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `lopdf` crate is irrelevant here and I’ll try to focus on the list from
```

> the beginning.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what you're trying to say with this?

First off let’s take a look at pure Rust structs and functions.

```rust
// Enum that determinates value formatting
pub enum FieldType {
    Money,
    Text,
    Slotted,
}

// Struct describing text
pub struct PdfWriterOperation {
    page_number: i32,
    font: (String, i32),
    dimensions: (f64, f64),
    field_type: FieldType,
    value: Option<String>,
}

// Struct which is the program's input
pub struct PdfWriterConfiguration {
    input_file_path: Option<String>,
    output_file_path: String,
    operations: Vec<PdfWriterOperation>,
}

> pub fn read_config() -> PdfWriterConfiguration {

Reviewer 2: I don't understand why this is called `read_config` as it seems to write some example text?

Reviewer 2: I'd consider renaming – this is a bit confusing

>   PdfWriterConfiguration {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    PdfWriterConfiguration {
```

👀

>         input_file_path: None,

Reviewer 2: what's `None`?

Author: The `None` variant of `Option`, it also has `Some` variant.

Reviewer 2: ah, nvm 🤦

        output_file_path: "PIT-8C-modified.pdf".to_string(),
        operations: vec![
            PdfWriterOperation {
                page_number: 0,
                font: ("F1".to_string(), 10),
                dimensions: (462.82, 55.92),
                value: Some("120.99".to_string()),
                field_type: FieldType::Money,
            },
            PdfWriterOperation {
                page_number: 0,
                font: ("F1".to_string(), 10),
                dimensions: (43.32, 347.81),
                value: Some("41.0".to_string()),
                field_type: FieldType::Money,
            },
        ],
    }
}

pub fn create_pdf(config: PdfWriterConfiguration) -> Result<(), std::io::Error> {}
```

This is the overview of pretty much the entirety of the Rust implementation
“minus” the `lopdf` interaction. In general, the idea is that given

> PdfWriterConfiguration a `create_pdf` or `modify_pdf`, functions create or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`PdfWriterConfiguration` a `create_pdf` or `modify_pdf`, functions create or
```

> PdfWriterConfiguration a `create_pdf` or `modify_pdf`, functions create or

Reviewer 2: What are the `create_pdf` and `modify_pdf` functions? I'm not following.

manipulate PDF files in some way.

> The only relevant part of implementation here is the struct itself, as you can

Reviewer 2: Which of the structs?

see it has `numbers`, `strings`, `tuples`, `structs` and `enums`. Later we’ll
see how they map to Elixir data structures.

## Rustler-ize-it

> Now we need to add traits to our data and functions so the tooling knows how to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we need to add traits to our data and functions so Rustler knows how to
```

?

marshall the data between Rust and Elixir environments.

```rust
// import Rustler traits
use rustler::{NifStruct, NifUnitEnum};

#[derive(NifUnitEnum)]
pub enum FieldType {
    Money,
    Text,
    Slotted,
}

#[derive(NifStruct)]
#[module = "RustlerPdf.PdfWriterOperation"]
pub struct PdfWriterOperation {
    page_number: i32,
    font: (String, i32),
    dimensions: (f64, f64),
    field_type: FieldType,
    value: Option<String>,
}

#[derive(NifStruct)]
#[module = "RustlerPdf.PdfWriterConfiguration"]
pub struct PdfWriterConfiguration {
    input_file_path: Option<String>,
    output_file_path: String,
    operations: Vec<PdfWriterOperation>,
}
```

> The `NifStruct` `NifUnitEnum` and `module = "Elixir.ModuleName` attribute

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `NifStruct`, `NifUnitEnum`, and `module = "Elixir.ModuleName` attributes
```

provide implementations and metadata for the languages to communicate.

> ### Enum variant with value - NifTaggedEnum

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Enum variant with value - `NifTaggedEnum`
```

> An additional note here: I’m using `NifUnitEnum` which is a simple Enum variant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An additional note here: I’m using `NifUnitEnum` which is a simple `Enum` variant.
```

> If you’d like to use Rust Enum variant that also carries data, you might use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you’d like to use a Rust `Enum` variant that also carries data, you might use
```

```

### Back to Rustlerizing - Functions

```rust
#[rustler::nif]
pub fn read_config() -> PdfWriterConfiguration {
  priv_read_config()
}

fn priv_read_config() -> PdfWriterConfiguration {
  PdfWriterConfiguration {
        input_file_path: None,
        output_file_path: "PIT-8C-modified.pdf".to_string(),
        operations: vec![
            PdfWriterOperation {
                page_number: 0,
                font: ("F1".to_string(), 10),
                dimensions: (462.82, 55.92),
                value: Some("120.99".to_string()),
                field_type: FieldType::Money,
            },
            PdfWriterOperation {
                page_number: 0,
                font: ("F1".to_string(), 10),
                dimensions: (43.32, 347.81),
                value: Some("41.0".to_string()),
                field_type: FieldType::Money,
            },
        ],
    }
}
```

`read_config` function is simple enough that it doesn’t require any additional
treatment. Since it’s only delivering hardcoded data and is not dealing with any
kind of IO, it just needs an attribute

`#[rustler::nif]`.

I’m also splitting the functions into the plain Rust functions and the public

> ones used by Rustler as bindings. This most definitely should be built as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ones that Rustler exposes to Elixir. This most definitely should be built as
```

might be clearer?

> ones used by Rustler as bindings. This most definitely should be built as
> regular Rust crate and another Rustler ‘bridge’ module. I decided to just add

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ones used by Rustler as bindings. The goal is to keep a regular Rust crate and an additional Rustler ‘bridge’ module separated. I decided to just add
```

prefixes here - for the purpose of this post, I believe this simplifies things a

> bit.

Reviewer 2: You mean the Rust elements are prefixed with `priv_`? Might be worth explaining a bit more – I'm not 100% sure I understand correctly.

        eacces, // Permission denied
        epipe, // Broken pipe
        eexist, // File exists

        unknown // Other error
    }
}

// Translates std library errors into Rustler atoms
fn io_error_to_term(err: &IoError) -> Atom {
    match err.kind() {
        IoErrorKind::NotFound => atoms::enoent(),
        IoErrorKind::PermissionDenied => atoms::eacces(),
        IoErrorKind::BrokenPipe => atoms::epipe(),
        IoErrorKind::AlreadyExists => atoms::eexist(),
        _ => atoms::unknown(),
    }
}

#[rustler::nif]
pub fn create_pdf(env: Env, config: PdfWriterConfiguration) -> Result<Term, RustlerError> {
    match priv_create_pdf(config) {
        Ok(()) => Ok(atoms::ok().to_term(env)),
        Err(ref error) => return Err(RustlerError::Term(Box::new(io_error_to_term(error)))),
    }
}

fn priv_create_pdf(config: PdfWriterConfiguration) -> Result<(), std::io::Error> {}
```

`create_pdf` is slightly more complicated as it involves some error handling.

`priv_create_pdf` is dealing with creating an actual file on the filesystem so
it might result in an error.

In order to handle such situation, we’ve defined a module called `atoms` which

> uses `rustler::atoms!` macro to create methods to simplify creating and decoding

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
uses the `rustler::atoms!` macro to create methods to simplify creating and decoding
```

atoms.

> `io_error_to_term` takes an std::io::error, matches on the kind of error and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`io_error_to_term` takes a `std::io::error`, matches on the kind of error and
```

translates that into an `Atom`.

As you’ve probably noticed `create_pdf` expects an `env` argument which is

> always present with all NIFs. Env is used by Rustler for communication and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
always present with all NIFs. `Env` is used by Rustler for communication and
```

encoding/decoding data between BEAM.

`read_config` and `add` in the previous examples are not using it so it’s
possible to omit its declaration.

### Exporting NIFs

```rust
rustler::init!("Elixir.RustlerPdf", [read_config, create_pdf]);
```

At the end of the file change the `rustler::init!` macro to the above: this

> let’s the Rustler know to bind `read_config` function to `Elixir.RustlerPdf`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
let’s Rustler know to bind `read_config` function to `Elixir.RustlerPdf`
```

module.

## The Elixir part

Once the Rust crate exports the functions, we need to let the Elixir side know

> what functions are expected to be bound with the module. Note that knowing the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
what functions are expected to be bound to the module. Note that knowing the
```

function couldn’t be loaded.

```elixir
defmodule RustlerPdf do
  use Rustler,
    otp_app: :rustler_pdf,
    crate: :rustlerpdf

  def read_config(), do: :erlang.nif_error(:nif_not_loaded)
  def create_pdf(_pdf_writer_configuration), do: :erlang.nif_error(:nif_not_loaded)
end
```

Now we can use the NIFs like regular Elixir functions. Let’s try it out in the
interactive console `iex -S mix`

```elixir
[nix-shell:~/Projects/elixir-pdf-experiment/rustler_pdf]$ iex -S mix

iex(1)> RustlerPdf.read_config()
%{
  __struct__: RustlerPdf.PdfWriterConfiguration,
  input_file_path: nil,
  operations: [
    %{
      __struct__: RustlerPdf.PdfWriterOperation,
      dimensions: {462.82, 55.92},
      field_type: :money,
      font: {"F1", 10},
      page_number: 0,
      value: "120.99"
    },
    %{
      __struct__: RustlerPdf.PdfWriterOperation,
      dimensions: {43.32, 347.81},
      field_type: :money,
      font: {"F1", 10},
      page_number: 0,
      value: "41.0"
    }
  ],
  output_file_path: "PIT-8C-modified.pdf"
}
iex(2)>
```

Notice how the Rust struct now maps to a plain Elixir `map` type with additional

> \_\_struct\_\_ metadata: this is how Rustler ensures type safety. If the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`\_\_struct\_\_` metadata: this is how Rustler ensures type safety. If the
```

> \_\_struct\_\_ would be missing, then we’d get an `ArgumentError` exception.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`\_\_struct\_\_` would be missing, then we’d get an `ArgumentError` exception.
```

Out of curiosity I was also benchmarking this implementation against an Elixir
library called `elixir-pdf` and it seems like it was roughly 2x slower, but
interestingly used 1/3 less memory. I’m not too familiar with profiling, so I’ll

> leave it at that.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I'd add this tbh – saying in the beginning that Rust is great for improving performance but then showing the implementation is slower in the end doesn't really make a great point :) Of course I understand this hasn't been optimized at all etc. but there's also not much value in showing these numbers at all?

Author: The elixir implementation is 2x slower

Reviewer 2: Ah, got it – I'd rephrase this as currently I think it's saying Rust is slower or it's at least confusing.

```elixir
def benchmark() do
    Benchee.run(
      %{
        "create_pdf" => fn -> RustlerPdf.create_pdf(RustlerPdf.read_config()) end,
        "e_create_pdf" => fn -> RustlerPdf.e_create_pdf() end
      },
      time: 10,
      memory_time: 1
    )
  end
```

```elixir
Operating System: macOS
CPU Information: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-9750H CPU @ 2.60GHz
Number of Available Cores: 12
Available memory: 16 GB
Elixir 1.14.2
Erlang 23.3.4.17

Benchmark suite executing with the following configuration:
warmup: 2 s
time: 10 s
memory time: 1 s
reduction time: 0 ns
parallel: 1
inputs: none specified
Estimated total run time: 26 s

Benchmarking create_pdf ...
Benchmarking e_create_pdf ...

Name                   ips        average  deviation         median         99th %
create_pdf          2.02 K        0.49 ms    ±56.09%        0.48 ms        0.70 ms
e_create_pdf        0.96 K        1.04 ms    ±42.20%        1.03 ms        1.22 ms

Comparison:
create_pdf          2.02 K
e_create_pdf        0.96 K - 2.11x slower +0.55 ms

Memory usage statistics:

Name            Memory usage
create_pdf           1.65 KB
e_create_pdf         1.17 KB - 0.71x memory usage -0.47656 KB
```

### Conclusion

> I've shown how you can make use of Rustler in order to add a functionality to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I've shown how you can make use of Rustler in order to add functionality to
```

performance while Elixir and the BEAM are excellent at low latency connections
and message passing. With Rustler you don't need to choose between one or
another, but you could use both instead :) So don't hesitate and experiment,
it's both fun and productive for the developers and could be very beneficial for
your bussiness.

Consider taking a brief look at the full implementation of the Rust program
here:
[https://github.com/BobrImperator/rustler_pdf](https://github.com/BobrImperator/rustler_pdf)

Further reading:

- [https://github.com/rusterlium/rustler#getting-started](https://github.com/rusterlium/rustler#getting-started)
- [https://github.com/rusterlium/NifIo](https://github.com/rusterlium/NifIo)
- [https://github.com/discord/sorted_set_nif](https://github.com/discord/sorted_set_nif)
- [https://github.com/J-F-Liu/lopdf](https://github.com/J-F-Liu/lopdf)
- [https://github.com/andrewtimberlake/elixir-pdf](https://github.com/andrewtimberlake/elixir-pdf)
- [https://discord.com/blog/using-rust-to-scale-elixir-for-11-million-concurrent-users](https://discord.com/blog/using-rust-to-scale-elixir-for-11-million-concurrent-users)

> - [https://discord.com/blog/why-discord-is-switching-from-go-to-rust](https://discord.com/blog/why-discord-is-switching-from-go-to-rust)

Reviewer 2: Let's add a pitch for our Rust workshop in the end :)

```suggestion
- [https://discord.com/blog/why-discord-is-switching-from-go-to-rust](https://discord.com/blog/why-discord-is-switching-from-go-to-rust)

Btw: if you'd like to get started using Rust but aren't sure how to get started, consider our [Rust workshop](/services/workshops/rust-for-the-web/)!
```
